>> Brangham: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, OCTOBER 25:
RAIN-SOAKED TEXAS CONTENDS WITH
FLASH FLOODS.
PRESIDENT OBAMA WANTS AMERICAN
SCHOOL KIDS TO SPEND LESS TIME
TAKING STANDARDIZED TESTS.
AND THE PRESIDENT OF HONDURAS
TALKS TO US ABOUT THE SURGE OF
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE IN HIS
COUNTRY.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
>> Brangham: GOOD EVENING, I'M
HARI SREENIVASAN IS ON
ASSIGNMENT.
A MAJOR RAINSTORM HAS DUMPED A
FOOT OF WATER ON PARTS OF TEXAS
AND IS NOW MOVING EAST.
HOUSTON RECEIVED NINE INCHES OF
RAIN IN THE PAST DAY, CAUSING
FLOODING AND NUMEROUS ROADS
CLOSURES.
THE HOUSTON FIRE DEPARTMENT
RESCUED 28 MOTORISTS STRANDED BY
HIGH WATERS.
THE STORM SYSTEM HAS POURED ON
SOUTHEAST TEXAS SINCE FRIDAY,
ALONG WITH THE REMNANTS OF
HURRICANE PATRICIA.
AUTHORITIES SAY ONE SAN ANTONIO
MAN REMAINS MISSING AFTER BEING
SWEPT AWAY BY FLOOD WATERS WHILE
WALKING HIS DOG.
AS THE STORMS MOVE EAST INTO
LOUISIANA, WEATHER FORECASTERS
SAY SOME AREAS AROUND NEW
ORLEANS AND BATON ROUGE COULD
GET UP TO EIGHT INCHES OF RAIN
THROUGH TOMORROW.
THE LEADERS OF ELEVEN EUROPEAN
NATIONS GATHERED IN BRUSSELS
TODAY FOR ANOTHER SUMMIT TO DEAL
WITH THE UNENDING FLOW OF
MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES.
THE PRIME MINISTER OF SLOVENIA,
WHICH HAS SEEN 60,000 ARRIVALS
IN THE PAST 10 DAYS--SINCE
HUNGARY BLOCKED ITS COMMON
BORDER-- SAID THE 28-MEMBER
EUROPEAN UNION WON'T SURVIVE
UNLESS IT FINDS A SOLUTION TO
THIS PROBLEM.
THE UNITED NATIONS HIGH
COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES IS
CALLING ON THE E.U. TO DEVISE A
NEW SYSTEM TO REGISTER AND
SCREEN MIGRANTS WHEN THEY FIRST
ARRIVE.
CROATIA'S PRIME MINISTER TODAY
SAID GREECE NEEDS TO ASSERT
GREATER CONTROL OF THE WATERS
BETWEEN ITS ISLANDS AND TURKEY.
MIGRANTS, NOW HELD IN BORDER
CAMPS, COMMONLY CROSS THE AEGEAN
SEA TO GREECE FROM TURKEY, AFTER
FLEEING CONFLICTS IN SYRIA,
IRAQ, AND AFGHANISTAN.
SINCE SEPTEMBER, NEARLY 250,000
MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES HAVE
PASSED THROUGH CENTRAL EUROPE,
RUSSIA IS CALLING FOR NEW
ELECTIONS IN SYRIA TO HELP BRING
AN END TO SYRIA'S CIVIL WAR,
WHICH IS NOW IN ITS FIFTH YEAR.
TODAY, IN THE SYRIAN CAPITAL OF
DAMASCUS, PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-
ASSAD TOLD A VISITING RUSSIAN
DELEGATION HE WOULD GO ALONG
WITH ELECTIONS AFTER WHAT HE
CALLED, QUOTE, "TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS" ARE ERADICATED.
ONE RUSSIAN LAWMAKER AT THE
MEETING TODAY SAID ASSAD IS
READY TO INCLUDE QUOTE
"REASONABLE, PATRIOTIC
OPPOSITION FORCES" IN THOSE NEW
ELECTIONS.
>> THE FIRST AIM, THE STRUGGLE
AND VICTORY OVER THE TERRORISM,
AND AFTER THAT THE ELECTIONS,
PARLIAMENTARY OR PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTIONS.
BUT FIRST OF ALL WE MUST DO,
REACH PEACEFUL, PEACE ON SYRIAN
LAND.
>> Brangham: AND A
CLARIFICATION: ON YESTERDAY'S
PROGRAM, WE SAID RUSSIAN FOREIGN
MINISTER SERGEY LAVROV HAD SAID
RUSSIAN WARPLANES WOULD SUPPORT
THE FREE SYRIAN ARMY -- A REBEL
GROUP -- AGAINST PRESIDENT
ASSAD.
WHILE LAVROV DID SAY RUSSIA
WOULD SUPPORT THE REBELS, THAT
SUPPORT IS INTENDED FOR THE
EFFORT AGAINST ISIS.
ELSEWHERE IN THE MIDDLE EAST,
PALESTINIAN LEADERS ARE
EXPRESSING SKEPTICISM ABOUT A
PLAN TO EASE TENSIONS IN
JERUSALEM.
THE PLAN, ANNOUNCED YESTERDAY BY
ISRAEL, JORDAN AND U.S.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY,
WOULD INSTALL SURVEILLANCE
CAMERAS AROUND JERUSALEM'S AL-
AQSA MOSQUE, KNOWN AS "HARAM AL
SHARIF" TO MUSLIMS AND "THE
TEMPLE MOUNT" TO JEWS.
PALESTINIAN FOREIGN MINISTER
RIYAD AL-MALIKI SAID TODAY THE
CAMERAS ARE A QUOTE "NEW TRAP"
TO ARREST MUSLIMS.
BUT ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU SAID THE GOAL
IS TO RETAIN THE STATUS QUO FOR
BOTH MUSLIM WORSHIPPERS AND
VISITORS AND TO THWART ANY
ATTACKS.
ALREADY, ISRAELI SOLDIERS ARE
CHECKING I.D.'S AT ENTRANCES TO
THE HOLY SITE.
THE MEASURES FOLLOW A MONTH OF
VIOLENCE.
TODAY IN THE CITY OF HEBRON,
ISRAELI SOLDIERS SHOT AND KILLED
A PALESTINIAN WOMAN WHO THEY
SAID DREW A KNIFE AND APPROACHED
THEM.
>> Brangham: PRESIDENT OBAMA
AND THE FEDERAL DEPARTMENT OF
EDUCATION ARE CALLING ON STATES
TO CUT BACK ON STANDARDIZED
TESTS IN SCHOOLS.
U.S. SCHOOL KIDS FROM PRE-K
THROUGH 12TH GRADE, ON AVERAGE,
TAKE EIGHT STANDARDIZED TESTS
EVERY YEAR.
THAT'S ALMOST ONE TEST A MONTH
DURING THE SCHOOL YEAR.
IN A FACEBOOK VIDEO YESTERDAY,
THE PRESIDENT SAID TEACHERS HAVE
TOLD HIM THE PRESSURE TO TEACH
TO THOSE TESTS, QUOTE: "TAKES
THE JOY OUT OF TEACHING AND
LEARNING."
HIS ADMINISTRATION HAS NOW
RELEASED A "TESTING ACTION PLAN"
WITH NEW GUIDELINES.
FOR MORE INSIGHT ON THAT, I'M
JOINED BY KATE ZERNIKE OF THE
NEW YORK TIMES.
>> SO THIS IS A PRETTY BIG
STATEMENT FROM THE PRESIDENT ON
THIS VERY CONTENTIOUS ISSUE, WHY
IS HE COMING OUT NOW?
>> WELL, I THINK THEY WANTED TO
GET PAST THE SPRING TESTING THE
PUSH LAST YEAR, OR THIS YEAR,
BUT I THINK ALSO THERE WAS A
REPORT COMING OUT FROM COUNCIL
OF GRADE CITY SCHOOLS WHICH IS A
COALITION OF 20 URBAN SCHOOL
DISTRICT AND THEY GENERALLY HAVE
BEEN PROTESTING BUT THE
SUPERINTENDENT SET OUT TO FIND
OUT HOW MANY TESTS THE KIDS ARE
TAKING AND THE REPORT CAME OUT
SATURDAY WITH THEY ARE JUST, AS
YOU SAID, YOU KNOW, EIGHT TEST
AS YEAR, THERE ARE JUST SO MANY,
SO MANY DIFFERENT TESTS, A LOT
OF THESE TESTS ARE NOT ONLY
ONEROUS BUT KIND OF POINT LESS
AND PURPOSELESS AND NOT TIED TO
WHAT WE WANT THEM TO BE TIED TO,
LEARNING IN THE CLASSROOM.
>> Brangham: SO THE PRESIDENT
ACKNOWLEDGES MAYBE WE ARE
TESTING KIDS TOO MUCH, EVEN
AKNOWLEDGES HIS ADMINISTRATION
MAY BE PART OF THE PROBLEM.
WHAT IS HE PROPOSING AS A
POSSIBLE SOLUTION TO THAT A?.
I THINK WHAT WILL JUMP OUT TO
PEOPLE IS HE WANTS A CAP ON THE
TIME SPENT ON TESTING SO NO MORE
THAN TWO PERCENT OF CLASSROOM
TIME SHOULD BE SPENT ON TESTING
AND THAT IS A REDUCTION FROM
WHAT THE COUNCIL OF GRADE SCHOOL
FOUND BUT THEY ARE PROPOSING
THINGS LIKE, SAYING NO TEACHER
SHOULD BE EVALUATED SOLELY ON
TESTS, NO CHILD SHOULD BE, NO
CHILD FROM HIGH SCHOOL
GRADUATION OR ANY CUTOFF SHOULD
BE ATTACHED SOLELY TO A TEST SO
THAT IS A BIG DEAL, BIG
PROPONENTS OF TESTING THAT GOT
US IN TROUBLE, THEY WANTED
TESTING THE PROBLEM IS WE
STARTED TYING IT TOO TO TOO MANY
THINGS, TEACHERS WON'T GET
TENURE IF THEY DON'T PASS THE
TEST OR THE KIDS, OR KIDS WON'T
GRADUATE FROM HIGH SCHOOL IF
THEY DON'T PASS THE TESTS.
>> Brangham: 0 SO THE
ADVOCATES OF TESTING SAY, OKAY
MAYBE A LITTLE BIT OF REFORM IS
USEFUL BUT DON'T THROW THE BABY
OUT WITH THE BATH WATER.
>> ABSOLUTELY, THIS IS A 15 YEAR
APPROACH, BEFORE THIS IS
HAPPENING, THERE WAS AT THAT LOT
OF KIDS, PARTICULARLY IN URBAN
SCHOOLS, WHO WERE NOT LEARNING
ANYTHING, AND SO, NOT LEARNING
-- NOT LEARNING IS WORSE BUT
THERE IS NO ACCOUNTABILITY AND
NO STANDARDS AND PASSING THEM
FROM GRADE TO FRAYED SO THIS IS
AN EFFORT TO MAKE SURE WE HAD
SOME ACCOUNTABILITY, THIS IS A
$600 BILLION INDUSTRY, PUBLIC
SCHOOL IN AMERICA, IT IS
REASONABLE TO EXPECT AT THAT WE
WOULD WANT WITH SOME
ACCOUNTABILITY BUT THE PROBLEM
IS, AS IN MANY THINGS THE
PENDULUM SWUNG TOO FAR.
>> Brangham: THIS IS OBVIOUSLY
A HUGE CONTENTIOUS ISSUE ACROSS
THE COUNTRY, A LOT OF PARENTS
AND SCHOOL DISTRICTS HAVE BEEN
IN A REAL UPROAR OVER THIS
TESTING, DO YOU THINK THIS
EFFORT BY THE PRESIDENT, THIS
INITIATIVE IS GOING TO PUT -- IS
GOING TO SATISFY THE CRITICS?
YOU KNOW, I REALLY DON'T THINK
IT IS, I THINK A LOT OF PEOPLE
ARE SAYING THIS IS TOO LITTLE
TOO LATE.
YOU KNOW, THE QUESTION REALLY
HAS BEEN IN SUBURBAN DISTRICTS
WHERE PEOPLE FELT SCHOOLS ARE
FINE, WHY IS THERE THIS PUSH?
WE ARE DOING EVERYTHING FINE,
THIS IS NOT OUR PROBLEM.
THE OPT OUT MOVEMENT WE HAVE
SEEN HAS LARGELY BEEN IN
SUBURBAN DISTRICTS AND WE HAVE
SEEN VERY FEW OPT OUTS IN URBAN
DISTRICTS, I THINK THE PROBLEM
IS GOING TO SAY WE WANT THIS CAP
ON TESTING BUT WHAT KIND OF
TESTS WILL WE BE ALLOWED TO USE,
THERE IS ALWAYS A PROBLEM,
SCHOOL IN THIS COUNTRY ASK A
LOCAL TRADITION, SO THE
AFFILIATION TO WHERE US THIS
TEST OR YOU SHOULDN'T USE
THIS TEST, THAT IS THE PROBLEM
WE ARE GOING TO SEE AGAIN AS
PEOPLE WILL CALL IT A FEDERAL
TAKEOVER.
>> Brangham: ALL RIGHT, KATE
ZERNIKE OF "THE NEW YORK TIMES",
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> Brangham: TODAY AT THE
VATICAN, POPE FRANCIS CLOSED A
THREE-WEEK-LONG MEETING OF
CATHOLIC BISHOPS FOCUSED ON THE
CHURCH'S POSITION ON FAMILY
ISSUES.
THE BISHOPS EXPRESSED A MORE
TOLERANT VIEW TOWARD DIVORCED
CATHOLICS, BUT BLOCKED ANY
RECONSIDERATION OF THE CHURCH'S
STANCE ON GAY MARRIAGE.
IN COMMENTS WIDELY SEEN AS
CRITICAL OF CHURCH LEADERS, THE
POPE SAID IN PART, QUOTE:
JOINING ME NOW VIA SKYPE FROM
ROME IS PHILIP PULLELLA.
HE'S THE VATICAN CORRESPONDENT
FOR REUTERS.
>> Brangham: PHILIP PULLELLA,
THIS SEEMS TO BE A VERY
CONTENTIOUS MEETING THESE LAST
FEW WEEKS, EXPLAIN WHAT IS GOING
ON THERE.
>> WELL, FOR THE LAST TWO WEEKS
THE BISHOPS WERE DISCUSSING,
BISHOPS FROM AROUND THE WORLD,
ABOUT 270 OF THEM PLUS ANOTHER
50 OR 60 DELEGATES AND OBSERVERS
WERE DISCUSSING FAMILY ISSUES.
THEY DISCUSSED A WHOLE RANGE OF
ISSUES, BUT THE KEY, THE TWO KEY
ELEMENTS THAT EMERGE AS THE MOST
CONTENTIOUS WAS HOW THE CHURCH
COULD BE MORE MERCIFUL TO THOSE
CATHOLICS WHO ARE DIVORCED, THE
CHURCH DOES NOT RECOGNIZE
DIVORCE AND THEN REMARRIED
OUTSIDE OF THE CHURCH WITHOUT
HAVING A CHURCH ANNULMENT.
NOW, A GOOD NUMBER OF THEM WANT
TO RETURN TO THE CHURCH
COMPLETELY WILLING TO BE ALLOWED
TO RECEIVE COMMUNION.
BUT AS THINGS STAND NOW, THEY
CAN ONLY RECEIVE COMMUNION IF
THEY ABSTAIN FROM SEX WITH THEIR
NEW PARTNER.
OTHERWISE, THEY ARE CONSIDERED
TO BE AN ADULTEROUS
RELATIONSHIP.
NOW THERE HAS BEEN A LOT OF
CONTROVERSY ABOUT THAT, AND A
LOT OF REQUESTS, PARTICULARLY
FROM THE GERMAN BISHOPS AND
OTHER BISHOPS CONFERENCES IN
EUROPE, AND EVEN ONE OR TWO
BISHOPS IN THE STATES, SO THE
PROPOSAL WAS TO ALLOW LOCAL
BISHOPS OR A CONFESSOR TO DECIDE
TOGETHER WITH THE CATHOLIC ON A
CASE-BY-CASE BASIS WHETHER HE OR
SHE FEELS THAT IN GOOD
CONSCIENCE THEY CAN GO TO
COMMUNION.
NOW, THIS WAS APPROVED AS A
POSSIBILITY BY THE SYNOD THAT
HAS TO BE DEVELOPED A BIT BUT
THIS IS CLEARLY A VICTORY FOR
THE PROGRESSIVES WHO WANTED THIS
TO BE, WHO WANTED THIS TO BE
BOBBLE.
BUT WE WILL SEE WHAT THE POPE
DECIDES HIMSELF WHEN HE WRITES
HIS OWN DOCUMENT.
>> Brangham: ON THE ISSUE OF
HOMOSEXUALITY THERE WAS NO
MOVEMENT.
>> YES.
THEY WOULD HAVE WANTED MORE
WELCOMING LANGUAGE ON
HOMOSEXUALS, THE CHURCH TEACHES
THAT HOMOSEXUAL TENDENCIES ARE
NOT -- THE, NOT SINFUL BUT THE
HOMOSEXUAL ACTS ARE, THAT WILL
NOT CHANGE IN THE FORESEEABLE
FUTURE, BUT WHAT PROGRESSIVES
WANTED IS MORE WELCOMING
LANGUAGE CALLING HOMOSEXUALS OUR
BROTHERS, OUR SISTERS, OUR
COLLEAGUES, A, AND PERHAPS EVEN
SOME LANGUAGE THAT SAID POSITIVE
ASPECTS TO IT LIKE GAY
RELATIONSHIP CAN BE SEEN IN A
LOVING, LASTING RELATIONSHIP,
THAT THIS ISSUE WAS SO
CONTENTIOUS THE LAST TIME THE
SYNOD MET A YEAR AGO WHERE SOME
OF THE VERY, VERY PROGRESSIVE
LANGUAGE WAS ABSOLUTELY THROWN
OUT BY THE SYNOD, THAT THIS TIME
THEY DECIDED JUST TO SIDESTEP
THAT ISSUE ALMOST TOTALLY AND
THE ONLY MENTION OF
HOMOSEXUALITY IS HOW TO -- HOW
TO DEAL WITH A HOMOSEXUAL WHO IS
PART OF YOUR FAMILY IN A LOVING
RELATIONSHIP, ET CETERA.
BUT IT RESTATED THE CHURCH'S
POSITION THAT A HOMOSEXUAL
MARRIAGE, A HOMOSEXUAL
RELATIONSHIP CANNOT BE
CONSIDERED IN ANY WAY EVEN
REMOTELY, EXCUSE ME, COMPARABLE
TO A MARRIAGE BETWEEN A MAN AND
A WOMAN.
SO THE ISSUE HAS BEEN
SIDE-STEPPED COMPLETELY.
>> Brangham: ALL RIGHT, PHILIP
PULLELLA, THANK YOU VERY MUCH
FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>>
>> Brangham: A WAVE OF
IMMIGRANTS TO THE U.S. FROM
CENTRAL AMERICA, PARTICULARLY EL
SALVADOR, GUATEMALA, AND
HONDURAS, HAS BEEN FUELED IN THE
PAST YEAR BY A SURGE OF VIOLENCE
IN THOSE COUNTRIES.
IN HONDURAS, THE LARGELY DRUG-
AND-GANG-RELATED VIOLENCE HAS
BEEN ACCOMPANIED BY A SURGE IN
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN.
AS WE REPORTED IN LAST NIGHT'S
PROGRAM, ADVOCATES SAY A WOMAN
IS MURDERED IN HONDURAS EVERY
THIRTEEN HOURS, AND THAT
HONDURAN COURTS RARELY RESOLVE
MOST DOMESTIC ABUSE COMPLAINTS.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JOHN
CARLOS FREY ASKS THE PRESIDENT
OF HONDURAS WHAT IS BEING DONE
TO STOP THE VIOLENCE.
AND A WARNING, THIS REPORT
CONTAINS SOME VIOLENT IMAGES.
>> Reporter: IN 2009, A COUP
BROUGHT DOWN THE ELECTED
PRESIDENT OF HONDURAS.
FOR THE PAST SIX YEARS,
INSTABILITY, POVERTY, AND GANG-
AND DRUG-RELATED CRIME HAVE
PLAGUED THIS CENTRAL AMERICAN
NATION OF EIGHT MILLION PEOPLE.
IN 2012, HONDURAS HAD THE MOST
MURDERS PER CAPITA OF ANY
COUNTRY IN THE WORLD 90
HOMICIDES FOR EVERY 100,000.
STOPPING THE VIOLENCE IS THE TOP
PRIORITY OF 46-YEAR-OLD
PRESIDENT JUAN ORLANDO
HERNANDEZ, WHO WAS ELECTED IN
2013 AND TOOK OFFICE LAST YEAR.
I SAT DOWN WITH HIM AT HIS
OFFICE IN THE NATION'S CAPITAL,
TEGUCIGALPA.
>> (translated): WE
UNFORTUNATELY COME FROM BEING
THE MOST VIOLENT COUNTRY ON THE
FACE OF THE EARTH AS CONSEQUENCE
OF DRUG TRAFFICKING THAT IS
PRODUCED IN SOUTH AMERICA AND IS
CONSUMED IN NORTH AMERICA.
>> Reporter: FORMERLY HEAD OF
THE HONDURAN LEGISLATURE,
PRESIDENT HERNANDEZ HAS DEPLOYED
THE MILITARY POLICE NATIONWIDE
TO COMBAT AND ARREST DRUG GANGS
AS A FIRST STEP IN STEMMING THE
VIOLENCE.
>> (translated): SO WE BEGAN
THERE, EXTRADITING DRUG
TRAFFICKERS, PROSECUTING GANGS,
LOCAL AND EXTERNAL TRAFFICKERS.
>> Reporter: PRESIDENT HERNANDEZ
SAYS THOSE ACTIONS HAVE TAMPED
DOWN THE VIOLENCE.
THE MURDER RATE HERE HAS
MODESTLY DECLINED IN THE PAST
TWO YEARS.
STILL, LAST SUMMER, GANG-RELATED
VIOLENCE WAS PART OF THE REASON
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF HONDURANS,
MANY OF THEM WOMEN AND CHILDREN,
TRIED TO FLEE TO THE UNITED
STATES.
>> (translated): THE NUMBER
OF CHILDREN MIGRATING HAS
DECREASED DRAMATICALLY IN
COMPARISON WITH THE REST OF THE
NORTHERN TRIANGLE OF CENTRAL
AMERICA.
HONDURAS HAS BEEN MOST EFFECTIVE
IN THAT.
BUT WE HAVE BEGUN TO WORK
BECAUSE WE ACCEPT THAT IT'S NOT
JUST THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE
GOVERNMENT BUT ALSO ALL
HONDURANS.
>> Reporter: PRESIDENT HERNANDEZ
IS ALSO TRYING TO ADDRESS A
GROWING PROBLEM IN HONDURAS:
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN.
30% OF HONDURAN WOMEN SAY
THEY'VE BEEN ABUSED, AND THE
MURDER RATE AMONG WOMEN MORE
THAN DOUBLED FROM 2005 THROUGH
2013.
>> (translated): WE ARE
COMMITTED, PARTICULARLY IN THE
CASE OF WOMEN WHO ARE OFTEN THE
VICTIMS OF THESE CONFLICTS
BETWEEN THE GANGS, AND THOSE
GANGS IN TURN HAVE CONNECTIONS
TO DRUG TRAFFICKING.
WE'RE ALSO WORKING ON ASPECTS OF
PREVENTION, IN THE SCHOOLS AND
CHURCHES, WITH ART AND CULTURE.
IT'S A COMPLETE PROGRAM, AND IT
WILL TAKE TIME.
>> Reporter: AS AN EXAMPLE,
PRESIDENT HERNANDEZ POINTS TO A
POLICING PROJECT WITH GREATER
COMMUNITY OUTREACH NEAR THE
NATION'S SECOND LARGEST CITY,
SAN PEDRO SULA, PARTIALLY FUNDED
BY THE UNITED STATES.
A VANDERBILT UNIVERSITY STUDY
LAST YEAR FOUND THE PROGRAM HAS
REDUCED CRIME AND INCREASED
PUBLIC TRUST IN THE POLICE.
STILL, THE PRESIDENT HAS FACED
WEEKLY PROTESTS OVER GOVERNMENT
CORRUPTION CONSIDERED ENDEMIC
HERE -- AND CONCERNS THAT MONEY
MEANT TO AID THE HONDURAN PEOPLE
IS GETTING SIPHONED OFF BY
CORRUPT OFFICIALS.
I ASKED THE PRESIDENT ABOUT
THOSE CORRUPTION ALLEGATIONS,
PARTICULARLY THAT MONEY MEANT TO
HELP BATTERED WOMEN ISN'T
REACHING VICTIMS.
IT STOPS WITH THE GOVERNMENT.
EVEN AID THAT MAY COME THROUGH
THIS COUNTRY.
>> (translated): OUR
ADMINISTRATION DECIDED TO LAUNCH
A CAMPAIGN EVEN BEFORE TAKING
OFFICE, NOT JUST TO PATCH UP
LAWS PASSED BY PREVIOUS
CONGRESSES, BUT ALSO TO
IMPLEMENT PROGRAMS THAT WILL
PROVIDE TRANSPARENCY AND PUT UP
A FULL FRONTAL ASSAULT AGAINST
CORRUPTION.
>> Reporter: BUT THE PRESIDENT'S
CRITICS SAY DESPITE THOSE
EFFORTS, LITTLE IS BEING DONE TO
ADDRESS THE EPIDEMIC OF DOMESTIC
VIOLENCE.
ANNA CRUZ MANAGES A PRIVATELY-
FINANCED SHELTER FOR ABUSED
HONDURAN WOMEN, PROVIDING
SERVICES, SHE SAYS, THE
GOVERNMENT DOES NOT, INCLUDING
HELPING VICTIMS FILE CRIMINAL
COMPLAINTS.
>> (translated): HONDURAS
DOESN'T CARE ABOUT WOMEN'S
ISSUES.
SO LIKE IN OUR CASE, WE DO NOT
RECEIVE ANY ASSISTANCE FROM THE
GOVERNMENT.
>> Reporter: CRUZ HOUSES A DOZEN
WOMEN AT A TIME, BUT SHE SAYS AT
LEAST 200 WOMEN IN THE CAPITAL
NEED A SAFE PLACE TO HIDE FROM
THEIR ABUSERS.
>> (translated): THE
GOVERNMENT SHOULD INJECT MONEY
FOR PROGRAMS AGAINST VIOLENCE
INSTEAD OF JUST MILITARY MEN ON
THE STREET EVERYWHERE.
ALL THAT MONEY SPENT ON THE
MILITARY SHOULD BE SPENT ON
VIOLENCE PREVENTION PROGRAMS.
>> Reporter: FOR MORE THAN 30
YEARS, GLADYS LANZA HAS RUN AN
ORGANIZATION DEDICATED TO ENDING
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN IN
HONDURAS.
SHE SAYS DOMESTIC VIOLENCE IS AS
MUCH A CULTURAL PROBLEM AS A
POLICY ISSUE.
>> (translated): IT'S A
MACHO, PATRIARCHAL MINDSET THAT
PUTS WOMEN INTO A KIND OF SECOND
CLASS.
YOU GO TO THE AUTHORITIES AND
THEY SAY, BUT MORE MEN ARE
MURDERED THAN WOMEN.
AND THEN YOU HAVE TO WAIT FOR AN
INVESTIGATION.
>> Reporter: LANZA SAYS SHE IS
HOPEFUL FOR CHANGE, BUT THE
CONTINUING VIOLENCE IS STILL
MOTIVATING WOMEN TO LEAVE
HONDURAS WITH THEIR CHILDREN.
>> (translated): THE MAJORITY
OF THE WOMEN LEFT PRECISELY
BECAUSE THEY WERE FLEEING
VIOLENCE -- THE VIOLENCE IN
THEIR HOMES WITH THEIR PARTNERS;
THE VIOLENCE IN THE COMMUNITY
WITH AUTHORITIES, WITH GANGS IN
THEIR NEIGHBORHOODS, AND EVEN
CONTRACT KILLINGS.
THERE ARE SO MANY AREAS OF
VIOLENCE IN WHICH WE WOMEN LIVE.
>> Reporter: MARIA MERCEDES
BUSTILLOS IS THE COUNTRY'S
SPECIAL PROSECUTOR FOR THE
PROTECTION OF WOMEN.
APPOINTED BY PRESIDENT
HERNANDEZ, SHE'S CRITICAL OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S APPROACH TO
STOPPING GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE.
>> (translated): WHAT HAPPENS
TO A VICTIM WHO IS SUFFERING
EXTREME POVERTY ON TOP OF THE
BEATINGS, THE INJURIES, THE
CONFINEMENT, THE ISOLATION, THE
MANIPULATION?
WHAT HAPPENS?
YOU HAVE A PERSON UNABLE TO
CHANGE HER LIFE AND OVERCOME ON
HER OWN, UNABLE TO PROVIDE FOOD
FOR HER CHILDREN.
THERE HAS TO BE A SYSTEM TO
EMPOWER HER, TO MAKE THE
DECISION TO GET AWAY FROM THE
VIOLENCE.
>> Reporter: I ASKED PRESIDENT
HERNANDEZ WHY THE COUNTRY HAS SO
FEW PLACES FOR WOMEN TO SEEK
REFUGE.
>> (translated): WE HAVE A
COUPLE OF PILOT PROGRAMS AT THE
NATIONAL OR CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
LEVEL.
WE'RE WORKING WITH MUNICIPAL
GOVERNMENTS IN THE CASE OF
WOMEN, CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS.
I BELIEVE WE'VE FOUND THE
FORMULA, AND HOW TO PRODUCE THAT
ON A LARGER SCALE IS COMING
NEXT.
>> Reporter: IS IT THE
GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSIBILITY, THE
HONDURAN GOVERNMENT'S
RESPONSIBILITY, TO STEM THE
VIOLENCE AND TO PROTECT WOMEN?
>> (translated): YES, OF
COURSE.
IT IS THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE
GOVERNMENT AND SOCIETY AS A
WHOLE.
IT'S AN ISSUE THAT CONCERNS US
ALL.
THAT'S THE AWARENESS WE'RE
TRYING TO CREATE IN THE HONDURAN
PEOPLE.
>> Brangham: HOW DOES THE
DANGER IN HONDURAS COMPARE TO
THE REST OF THE WORLD?
VIEW OUR INTERACTIVE MAP...
ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Brangham: A NEW EXHIBIT OF
PAINTINGS AT THE MUSEUM OF FINE
ARTS IN BOSTON SHOWS THAT DUTCH
MASTERS LIKE REMBRANDT AND
VERMEER UNDERSTOOD INCOME
INEQUALITY, EVEN IN 17TH
CENTURY.
JARED BOWEN FROM WGBH REPORTS.
>> Reporter: CLASS DISTINCTIONS
AT THE MUSEUM OF FINE ARTS IS
THE FIRST SHOW EVER TO LOOK AT
THE DUTCH MASTERS FOR HOW THEY
LOOKED AT SOCIETY.
THE ECONOMIC DIVIDE COULDN'T BE
ANY DEEPER SAYS CURATOR RONNI
BAER.
TELL ME ABOUT, WELL, IN THIS
CASE, THIS POOR LITTLE BOY.
>> THIS IS A VERY SMALL PANEL,
WHICH YOU'LL NOTICE HIS SOCK HAS
A HOLE IN IT; HE'S VERY
DISHEVELED.
HIS CLOTHES ARE NOT ALL OF A
PIECE.
ONE FEELS A KIND OF SYMPATHY TO
HIM.
BUT HE'S SLOUCHED OVER.
HIS LEGS ARE SPLAYED.
>> Reporter: WELL, THIS IS
OBVIOUSLY A STAGGERING CONTRAST
TO WHAT WE JUST SAW.
>> EXACTLY.
>> Reporter: WHO IS THIS?
>> HE WAS A TEXTILE MERCHANT.
HE'S DEPICTED A LITTLE BIT FROM
BELOW, SO THAT IT EVEN INCREASES
HIS IMPOSING STATURE.
AND HE'S SHOWN WITH THIS SWORD
AND THIS GREAT CURTAIN BEHIND
HIM AS THOUGH HE WERE AN
ARISTOCRATIC, ALMOST KINGLY LIKE
FIGURE.
>> Reporter: SUCH IS THE LIFE
BOTH LIVED AND CONTRIVED.
THE WEALTHY, BAER SAYS, WERE
INNATELY IMAGE CONSCIOUS.
THERE WAS DRIVE TO CONVEY
HEALTH, BOUNTY AND PRESTIGE.
CERTAINLY THE CASE OF THIS
TEXTILE MERCHANT AND HIS WIFE.
>> HE WENT TO VAN DER HELST, THE
MOST FASHIONABLE AND SUCCESSFUL
PORTRAIT PAINTER AT THE TIME,
AND HAD HIM PORTRAY THEM.
IT'S ALMOST LIKE AN AD: THIS IS
THE SOURCE OF HIS MONEY.
>> Reporter: SOME OF THE WORKS
REQUIRE DECODING.
THE SHOW FEATURES TWO
EXCEEDINGLY RARE VERMEER LOANS.
THEY MERELY SUGGEST WEALTH
RATHER THAN SWIM IN IT.
>> THE FACT THAT THIS WOMAN IS
WRITING A LETTER ALREADY
INDICATES HER SOCIAL STATUS,
THAT SHE'S WEALTHY ENOUGH TO
HAVE THE LEISURE TO READ AND
WRITE AND THAT SHE'S EDUCATED
ENOUGH TO KNOW HOW TO READ AND
WRITE.
THE MALE COUNTERPART TO HER IN
THIS SHOW IS AN ASTRONOMER, OR
ASTROLOGER, AND IT'S A RARE
PAINTING OF A MAN BY VERMEER.
AND HE'S AN AMATEUR; HE IS DOING
THIS AS A PASTIME, AS A
INTELLECTUAL PURSUIT THAT REALLY
ONLY THE WEALTHY COULD HAVE
DONE.
>> Reporter: JUST AS HE IS
TODAY, REMBRANDT WAS HIGHLY
SOUGHT AFTER-EVEN BY THE MIDDLE
CLASS.
A SHIPBUILDER AND HIS WIFE
COMMISSIONED THIS PORTRAIT ON
LOAN FROM QUEEN ELIZABETH II.
>> THE FLESH TONES, WHICH ARE
NOT MELDED IN ANY WAY.
YOU JUST HAVE SUCCESSIVE
SPLASHES OF COLOR, BUT YOUR EYE
SOMEHOW DOES THAT WORK, AND IT
MAKES HIM VERY LIVELY LOOKING.
SO THE BRUSHWORK IS GREAT.
>> Reporter: THEY WERE UPPER
MIDDLE CLASS-A CONTRAST TO THE
BAKER, TRADESMEN AND WOMEN
TENDING TO BUSINESS IN THEIR
MORE MODEST HOMES.
AND THEN THERE WERE THE
INDIGENT-CROWDED, STRUGGLING.
BOTH THESE PAINTINGS AND TABLE
SETTINGS GIVE A GLIMPSE OF HOW
MUCH LIFE VARIED BETWEEN THE
CLASSES.
HOW LUXURY TURNED PRACTICAL.
THE SHOW ENDS WITH A MEETING OF
THE CLASSES.
>> THE CLASSES MET EVERYWHERE:
THEY MET ON THE ICE, THEY MET ON
FERRY BOATS, THEY MET OUTSIDE
THE CITY WALLS.
BUT IT'S WHERE THEY MET AND
COULD NOT CROSS THAT'S MOST
POIGNANT-AT THE DOOR.
>> THE ITINERATE MUSICIANS DON'T
GET THE WHITE THAT THE WEALTHY
PEOPLE GET, AND THEY ARE PAINTED
IN DRAB COLORS, AND THEY ARE
PAINTED MUCH MORE BROADLY AND
BRUSHILY.
IT'S AN ASTOUNDING THING.
>> Reporter: AND WHERE THE
CLASSES REMAIN MOST DISTINCT.
>> Brangham: SINCE THE TALIBAN
WAS OUSTED FROM POWER 14 YEARS
AGO, AFGHANISTAN'S GOVERNMENT
HAS TAKEN STEPS TO IMPROVE THE
STATUS OF WOMEN, INCLUDING IN
EDUCATION.
THE NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN THOMPSON
REPORTS ON AN ADVANCEMENT IN
THAT EFFORT.
>> Reporter: 28 STUDENTS AT
KABUL UNIVERSITY FILED IN FOR A
FIRST-OF-ITS-KIND CLASS FOR
AFGHANISTAN.
IT IS THE INTRODUCTORY COURSE IN
A NEW MASTER'S DEGREE PROGRAM IN
GENDER AND WOMEN'S STUDIES, IN A
COUNTRY THAT HAS LONG STRUGGLED
TO PROVIDE EQUAL RIGHTS TO
WOMEN.
WHEN THE TALIBAN SEIZED POWER IN
1996, THE HARD-LINE ISLAMIST
REGIME BANNED WOMEN AND GIRLS
FROM GOING TO SCHOOL, HAVING
JOBS OUTSIDE THE HOME, OR EVEN
STEPPING OUT IN PUBLIC WITHOUT
BEING COVERED HEAD-TO-TOE IN A
BURQA.
AFTER THE U.S.-LED INVASION
POST 9/11 TOPPLED THE TALIBAN IN
2001, AFGHANISTAN'S NEW
CONSTITUTION GUARANTEED WOMEN'S
RIGHTS.
THERE'S BEEN PROGRESS, BUT MANY
AFGHAN WOMEN REMAIN
MARGINALIZED, AND VIOLENCE
AGAINST WOMEN HAS BEEN ON THE
RISE.
STILL, WHILE MILLIONS OF AFGHAN
GIRLS AND WOMEN HAVE GONE BACK
TO SCHOOL, THEIR ACCESS TO
HIGHER EDUCATION REMAINS
LIMITED.
ONE ISLAMIC STUDIES PROFESSOR AT
KABUL UNIVERSITY DISAPPROVES OF
THE NEW WOMEN'S STUDIES PROGRAM
THERE, BECAUSE, HE SAID, WOMEN
ARE NOT, IN FACT, EQUAL TO MEN.
STUDENTS IN THE TWO-YEAR PROGRAM
HOPE TO CHANGE THOSE BELIEFS.
>> (translated): THIS GENDER
PROGRAM IS REALLY NEEDED IN
AFGHANISTAN, BECAUSE MANY WOMEN
DO NOT KNOW ABOUT THEIR RIGHTS,
SO THROUGH THIS PROGRAM, WE CAN
MAKE WOMEN AWARE OF THEIR
RIGHTS, WHICH ENABLES THEM TO
WORK AND STUDY IN THIS SOCIETY,
AND WE ALSO WANT TO TELL WOMEN
THAT YOU ARE NOT ONLY MADE FOR
HOUSEWORK.
>> Reporter: THE UNIVERSITY
EXPECTS THESE EMPOWERED GRADUATE
STUDENTS TO SPREAD THAT MESSAGE
BEYOND THESE CLASSROOM WALLS.
>> Brangham: ON TOMORROW'S
NEWSHOUR OUR CULTURE AT RISK
SERIES LOOKS AT THE RESTORATION
OF PAINTINGS AND SCULPTURES
AT A WORLD FAMOUS INSTITUTE
IN FLORENCE, ITALY.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
THE PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND, HARI
SREENIVASAN WILL BE BACK NEXT
WEEK.
I'M WILLIAM BRANGHAM, THANKS FOR
WATCHING.
GOOD NIGHT.